2016 has been the year of the chatbot. Brands are increasingly employing chatbots to engage their customers. Various messaging platforms now host hundreds of chatbots that developers have built for them. Even though the chatbot space is getting more and more crowded, it‟s nowhere near saturated. Almost every phone app can be replaced by an intelligent chatbot. There are two important aspects to a chatbot‟s functioning: decoding messages and generating responses. Different systems handle these aspects in different ways. Before deep learning hit the scene earlier this decade, all chatbots used to have hard-coded responses. These retrieval-based models didn‟t generate any new text; they just picked a response from a fixed set. Such models have been the focus of a number of works (Williams and Young, 2007 [1]; Schatzmann et al., 2007 [2][3]; Misu et al., 2012 [4]; Litman et al., 2000 [5]). However, retrieval-based models are unsuitable for long or open-domain conversations for the following reasons: ● These models lack flexibility. The responses need to be predefined and are difficult to customize for different situations or requirements. ● Since the responses need to be defined manually, the domain or scope of the conversations these models are capable of having is extremely narrow. Generative models do not use predefined responses. They generate new responses from scratch. Generative models perform better than retrieval-based models as they can handle unseen cases and are often context-aware. One of the metrics that can be used to assess the performance of most conversational models is the BLEU score. The algorithm was originally created for evaluating the quality of machine translated text. BLEU scores are known to reasonably correlate with human judgment. However, another metric introduced specifically for the assessment of generative conversational models, ∆BLEU, outperforms BLEU [6]. In the remainder of this paper, I summarize and comment on few of the most influential works in this direction that define the current state-of-the-art